 1.1 The role of white matter tracts in syntax processing

[White fiber tracts]
Brain tries to save space and energy
Connections cost both space and energy, so brain is largely locally organized
Long-distance connections cost much more space and energy than local connections, while not transferring more information
The fact that long-distance connections exist means the transferred information is especially important and/or highly compressed

[Language network]
Dorsal & Ventral streams
The ventral stream uses two major long-distance fiber tracts: ECFS and UF
Ventral pathway I (ECFS): STG to BA45
Ventral pathway II (UF): aSTG to FOP
The dorsal stream uses two major long-distance fiber tracts: The arcuate fascicle and the superior longitudinal fascicle.
Dorsal pathway I (SLF): pSTG to premotor cortex in BA6
Dorsal pathway II (AF): pSTG to BA44


1.2 Functional anatomy of syntax processing

Region of interest: pSTS
pSTG is involved in complex syntax
Adults:
"Neuroimaging studies have tried to characterise the neu- ral substrate for representing human action. Many of these studies have followed a different tradition in psychophysics and developmental psychology of investigating the percep- tion of “biological motion” – that is, the characteristic articu- lated motion of chordate animal bodies (e.g. Vaina, Solomon, Chowdhury, Sinha, & Belliveau, 2001; Grossman & Blake, 2002; Beauchamp, Lee, Haxby, & Martin, 2002; Pelphrey, Mitchell, McKeown, Goldstein, Allison, & McCarthy, 2003) or body and face parts (e.g. Hoffman & Haxby, 2000; Hooker et al. 2003; Kilts et al. 2003; Pelphrey et al., 2003). Biologi- cal motion can also be perceived from the relative motion of just a few dots (“point-light walkers”, Johansson, 1973); if the dots are spatially or temporally rearranged, the percept is destroyed. These neuroimaging studies suggest that one brain region, the posterior superior temporal sulcus, is par- ticularly involved in the representation of biological motion.
Two sets of recent neuroimaging data suggest that the role of the posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) may extend beyond a response to biological motion, to more ab- stract representations of intentional action. First, Castelli, Happe, Frith, & Frith, (2000) and Schultz, Grelotti, Klin, Kleinman, Van der Gaag, Marois, & Skudlarski, (2003) reported that a region of the pSTS showed a significantly higher response to animations of moving geometric shapes that depicted complex social interactions than to anima- tions depicting inanimate motion. Second, using movies of human actors engaged in structured goal-directed ac- tions (e.g. cleaning the kitchen), Zacks, Braver, Sheridan, Donaldson, Snyder, Ollinger, Buckner, & Raichle, (2001) found that activity in the pSTS was enhanced when the agent switched from one action to another, suggesting that this region encodes the goal-structure of actions. Both of these results are consistent with a role for a region of pSTS cor- tex in representing intentional action, and not just biological motion." (doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2004.04.015)

 "More complex  syntactic processing, 
 including  the  identification  of  hierarchical  structures  within  a  sentence,  takes 
 place  later  at  around  300ms  to  500ms  in  the  already  mentioned  pSTG/STS 
 (Cooke  et  al.,  2002;  Vandenberghe  et  al.,  2002;  Humphries  et  al.,  2005; 
 Bornkessel and Schlesewsky, 2006; Kinno et al., 2008; Friederici et al., 2009; 
 Snijders et al., 2009; Santi and Grodzinsky, 2010; Newman et al., 2010). How-
 ever,  this  is  not  achieved  by  the  pSTG/STS  alone  but,  as  Friederici  argues, 
 critically involves the pars opercularis of the inferior frontal gyrus (IFGoper) in 
 Broca’s  area  (Friederici  et  al.,  2006;  Makuuchi  et  al.,  2009;  Newman  et  al., 
 2010;  Wilson  et  al.,  2010)." (Skeide 2013)

Children:
- Development of simple sentence processing is complete at age 3 (Friederici 2005)
- Kids often don't have the AF tract yet until early adulthood
Previous findings: kids rely more on the ventral pathway
Ventral processing involves BA45 (no condition effect in adults)
Processing is more vulnerable to bias (semantic crosstalk)


1.3 Experimental paradigm

Task: Exploring role and timing of pSTG/pSTS activity in complex syntax processing
Actor/Undergoer setup
Object-/Subject-relative clauses

1.4 Choice of measurement methods

[Acquisition]
MEG: Very high sampling rate
very little spatial distortion from the head
Low signal-to-noise ratio

[Forward models]
Based on individual high-resolution anatomical data
1-layer BEM: Robust creation, good software support
Quick and semi-automated process

[Localization]
Distributed source model: models a ton of unwanted activity
-> high SNR for actual ROI
sLORETA: no overlap effect at the boundaries, high ROI specificity

[Information transfer]
Meaning of information transfer
modelling vs. model-free, linear vs. nonlinear
Transfer Entropy is suited best for highly complex, nonlinear timescale data
Potential pitfall: Volume conduction (can also come from bad localization)
TrenTOOL can correct volume conduction

1.5 Research questions

Replication of EEG/fMRI results with MEG?
Which cortical regions are involved in the conditional effect?
Is semantic content relevant?
How long does each processing stage take?
In which order do the steps take place?
Can we see a different pathway in kids?

[Hypotheses]
Condition effect mainly in pSTG, BA44 (adults), BA45 (kids)
Kids: worse performance than adults
Kids: less involvement of pSTG
Adults vs kids: Dorsal II vs. Ventral II