2.2.1 MEG

[import scanning blurb from the wiki]
Acquisition of magnetoencephalographic data is widely performed in a similar manner. The study by [1], if not otherwise indicated, will be quoted as a typical example in this chapter.

[quote starts]
[MEG scanner and data acquisition]
MEG data were collected with an Elekta Neuromag VectorView® MEG scanner at the Oxford Centre for Human Brain Activity (OHBA), Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Warneford Hospital, Oxford, U.K. The scanner comprises 306 MEG-channel sensors (102 magnetometers, 204 planar gradiometers). Sensors were tuned prior to each MEG recording session to limit noise levels to approximately 2.5 fT/cm. Sensors that became very noisy during a recording block would be individually re-tuned at the next inter-block break, using the Neuromag automatized heating process or by eye, as necessary. Continuous MEG data were recorded at 1000 Hz sampling rate (0.3–330 Hz bandpass filter). Prior to data acquisition, all metal and other potential sources of electromagnetic interference were removed from participants. Quality of recording was confirmed by visual inspection of 1–2 min of MEG recording during quiet sitting prior to the start of the experiment. Electro-oculogram (EOG) and electrocardiogram (ECG) time-series were recorded simultaneously with MEG to track potential noise sources and artifacts. Four head position indicator (HPI) coils were attached to the participant's head and a Polhemus stylus and digitizer device were used to record the locations of fiducial points (right and left pre-auricular points (RPA, LPA) and nasion), the HPI coils, and between 40 and 80 extra digitizer points on the head surface. Prior to the recording of each stimulus block, head location in the scanner was measured with an automatic process that detected the coils. Continuous HPI recorded any head movements during data acquisition.
[quote ends]
Compared to this example, there were a few minor differences in this study: The scanner for this study was located in Bennewitz, at the department of Magnetoencephalography, Institute for cognitive and brain sciences, Leipzig, Germany. The quality of recording was determined each session in an empty room. We used five HPI coils, attached to the forehead. Finally, we used between 180 and 200 extra digitizer points on the head surface.

[Preprocessing and HPI correction]
[quote starts]
Data were preprocessed with Elekta Neuromag® MaxFilter software (version 2.1, May 2009) and with MNE-Python (version 0.8.6, October 2014). MaxFilter software reduces noise in the data by suppressing magnetic interference coming from outside and inside the sensory array, using signal-space separation (SSS). The MaxMove sub-command was used to spatially co-register MEG recordings across blocks to the median head position for each individual. MaxMove continuous HPI movement compensation was also applied.
[quote ends]
Our block-level recordings were coregistered to the initial (instead of the median) head position. Data were then subjected to a 0.4 FIR highpass filter (Hamming window design, 4367 coefficients, -130db damping at 0Hz) to remove DC components.

[Artifact removal]
MEG channels with abnormally high noise levels as identified by visual inspection were rejected from further analysis. A maximum of [3 channels] (median: [1 channel]) was removed.
The resulting pre-processed data contained major artifacts from spontaneous channel jumps, electrocardiographic (ECG) activity and electrooculographic (EOG) activity. Jump amplitudes were detected by selecting peaks in the z-transformed continuous data that exceeded a threshold of 12 standard deviations. Segments of 2 seconds in the pre-processed continuous data were rejected if any magnitude channel exceeded an amplitude of 6 * 10e-12 T (gradiometer channels: 400 * 10e-12 T/m). Continuous data were then decomposed into independent components (ICA) that explained 99% of the variance. Components that correlated significantly more (threshold of z=0.4) with EOG or ECG channels than other components were removed (children: median of 1 component per block, maximum of 3; adults: median of 0 components per block, maximum of 2). The resulting ICA components were used to reconstruct continuous data.

[Epoching]
The main trigger was set at the onset of the condition difference between sentences, i.e., on the "d" sound of "den" or "der". Epochs were created between 1000ms before and 3000ms after the main trigger. If the trial was skipped or answered incorrectly, the epoch was rejected. This procedure yielded an average of [] trials in children and [] trials in adults. The epochs were finally filtered with a 45Hz FIR highpass ([filter order 6, cutoff at 50Hz]).